KEP-4876: Mutable CSINode Allocatable Property (#4875)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-storage/4876-mutable-csinode-allocatable/README.md

#### Story 2

As a cluster operator, I use volumes during node setup for components like kubelet, containerd, and additional drivers. These boot volumes, which are not managed by CSI, may be detached after setup, and I need a way to reclaim these slots for other uses. The current static capacity reporting doesn't allow for this flexibility.

#### Story 3

As a cluster operator, I need the Kubernetes scheduler to accurately count the number of available device slots for both storage volumes and network interfaces. On certain machine types, network interfaces and volumes share device slots, and network interfaces may be dynamically
attached after the CSI driver is registered. This results in an inaccurate `Allocatable.Count` for volumes, causing stateful
pods to be scheduled on nodes with insufficient capacity, ultimately getting stuck in a `ContainerCreating` state.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer: I would also add that it's still possible for the scheduler to race with the updates. What are the strategies a user could do to mitigate that?

Author: You're right, this is an important point to address, and its the reason why there are two parts to this proposal.

The periodic sync that users can opt-in to by setting `NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds` in the `CSIDriver` object aims to generally help reduce the occurrence of this issue and also provides a mechanism by which slots could be claimed back (for example there are drivers which take into account out of band volumes and other devices during plugin registration, but once those devices are detached at a later point in time, the nodes are basically indefinitely underutilized). 

As you pointed out though, it is still possible for the scheduler to race with any updates to this value. And to be clear, that race will _always_ exist, as long as the scheduler relies on the value of `CSINode.Allocatable` to define the upper bound for attachments on nodes. But its worth highlight that even if the race is lost occasionally, the user experience is vastly improved by periodically syncing this value because today, once the value is inaccurate for any given node, the scheduler continues to make poor scheduling choices indefinitely.

> What are the strategies a user could do to mitigate that?

I believe that we can provide a much better user experience if the CO itself mitigates this race. Hence why this KEP also proposes that k8s attempt to update the value once an invalid state is detected and the race is lost (or even if there is no race at all and `NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds` is disabled because users haven't opted in to the periodic sync).

There aren't many pragmatic solutions users could adopt to mitigate this issue on their end, and the failure mode is quite painful to recover from. What most providers have been doing is allowing users to "reserve slots" as a way to work around this (subtract x from the value that would be reported by a driver's `NodeGetInfoResponse.MaxVolumesPerNode`).

type VolumeNodeResources struct {
    // Maximum number of unique volumes managed by the CSI driver that can be used on
    // A volume that is both attached and mounted on a node is considered to be used o
    // The same rule applies for a unique volume that is shared among multiple pods on
    // If this field is not specified, then the supported number of volumes on this no
    // +optional
    Count *int32
}
```

#### CSIDriver

A new field, `AllocatableUpdateInterval`, will be added to the `CSIDriverSpec` struct. This field allows a CSI driver to specify the interval at which the Kubelet should periodically query a driver's `NodeGetInfo` RPC endpoint to update the `CSINode` object. If this field is not set, updates will only occur in response to volume attachment failures as a result of no
capacity.

```golang
// CSIDriverSpec is the specification of a CSIDriver.
type CSIDriverSpec struct {
    ...
    // AllocatableUpdateInterval specifies the interval between periodic updates of
    // the CSINode allocatable capacity for this driver. If not set, periodic updates
    // are disabled, and updates occur only upon detecting capacity-related failures.
    // +optional

>     AllocatableUpdateInterval *metav1.Duration

Reviewer: I could call the field NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds, according to the following api conventions:

https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#units
https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#naming-conventions

Reviewer: Also any min/max values?

Author: Thank you! updated field name to `NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds` and included min value in comment, more context here:  https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4875#discussion_r1794160734

>     AllocatableUpdateInterval *metav1.Duration

Reviewer: Do we want to make this off by default and opt-in only? I have concerns about changing behavior for all CSI drivers.

Author: Yeah absolutely, the proposal is in alignment with this recommendation - cluster operators must explicitly define this value to enable the periodic sync.

    UpdateCSINode() error
}
```

#### CSINode Update Mechanism

- If `AllocatableUpdateInterval` is set in the `CSIDriver` object, Kubernetes will periodically call the CSI driver’s `NodeGetInfo` RPC endpoint at the defined interval, and update the `CSINode` object with the latest `Allocatable.Count`.

- If `AllocatableUpdateInterval` is not set, updates will only occur in response to a failure during volume attachment if the feature flag is set. For example, if the CSI driver returns a `ResourceExhausted` error, Kubernetes will immediately update the `CSINode` object so that the value more accurately reflects the actual state of the world.

The existing `NodeInfoManager` interface will be used to perform the actual update for consistency with established patterns.

#### Pod Construction Changes

To address race conditions where the scheduler assigns stateful pods to nodes with insufficient capacity, Kubelet's pod construction process during [WaitForAttachAndMount](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/volumemanager/volume_manager.go#L393) will now handle `ResourceExhausted` errors returned by CSI drivers during the `ControllerPublishVolume` RPC.

> The `ResourceExhausted` error is directly reported on the `VolumeAttachment` object associated with the relevant attachment.

Reviewer: ResourceExhausted could also be returned if some API quota is exceeded.

Author: Hmm, good callout. I think this shouldn't be an issue for us because the KEP leverages the error message directly on the [VolumeAttachmentStatus](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/storage/types.go#L186) for the `VolumeAttachment` object. In other words, by the time we hit this logic it is safe to assume the VA object exists.

Reviewer: I mean cloud provider API quota, ie too many attach calls were made.  So resourceexhausted would be returned but not because of too many attachments. I guess this could be ok because we will retry this noop with backoff.

```golang

> if err := kl.volumeManager.WaitForAttachAndMount(pod); err != nil {

Reviewer: Any consideration for checking in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/cc67c4cf34d6c6e73458835154d06d0b6012e50f/pkg/volume/csi/csi_attacher.go#L146? 

The logic in syncPod is csi-agnostic.

Author: I spent countless hours exploring this path when writing the KEP, and the main issue here is that we need to query a CSI driver's `NodeGetInfo` endpoint to retrieve the updated allocatable value before updating the `CSNode` object. That operation can't be done on the KCM side, it needs to be done on the node side :( 

Besides this, it would be helpful to create an event on the pod during pod construction to let cluster operators know that pod has failed to come up due to a volume attachment error as a result of insufficient capacity. The idea there is that cluster operators or https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/descheduler could leverage this event to "remove" the stateful pods that are stuck in `ContainerCreating` so that they may be scheduled to a different node that does have capacity.

Would love to hear your recommendation for a path forward here.

    if isResourceExhaustedError(err) {
        // Update CSINode
        // Generate event for affected pod
    } else {
        // Existing error handling
    }
}
```

This change ensures that when a pod fails to be constructed due to insufficient volume attachment capacity, that both:

> 1. The `CSINode` object is promptly updated to reflect the actual available capacity, improving future scheduling decisions.

Reviewer: I would consider some sort of backoff mechanism

Author: That makes sense, incorporated this feedback in latest rev.

These scenarios can lead to the CSI driver reporting an initial capacity that becomes inaccurate over time, causing the scheduler to make decisions based on outdated information. This results in pods being scheduled to nodes without sufficient capacity, ultimately getting stuck in a `ContainerCreating` state.

By making the `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` field mutable and introducing a mechanism to update it dynamically, we can ensure that the scheduler always has information which more accurately represents the actual state of the world, significantly improving the reliability of stateful pod scheduling.

### Goals

- Make `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` mutable.
- Enable CSI drivers to define the interval at which the `Allocatable.Count` value on each node is updated through the `CSIDriver` object.
- Automatically update `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` upon detecting a failure in volume attachment due to insufficient capacity.

### Non-Goals

- Modifying the core scheduling logic of Kubernetes.
- Implementing cloud provider-specific solutions within Kubernetes core.

> - Re-scheduling pods stuck in a `ContainerCreating` state.

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should be re-considered in beta, as it sounds like a major pain point for users.

But this is more a question for SIG Node (cc @dchen1107 @SergeyKanzhelev)

Author: for future reference - Important discussion related to this feedback here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4875#discussion_r1796111777.

> - Re-scheduling pods stuck in a `ContainerCreating` state.

Reviewer 3: is it something that we can check on pod admission instead? As we do with Device Plugin when we allocate devices  on admission and then can use them later without the risk of failing the container creation

Reviewer: @torredil have you looked into this?

Author: Yep, I did evaluate this path and ultimately, discarded it. My understanding is that the device plugin framework is used as a mechanism to advertise hardware resources to Kubelet. In the context of CSI though, we already have a good mechanism in place for this (Kubelet directly calls a CSI driver's `NodeGetInfo` RPC when the plugin is registered to learn about the limit). I don't see the benefit of implementing the same logic but in a different interface.

I think having a dedicated object for gathering node-specific CSI info (`CSINode`) and using that during scheduling continues to make sense (this KEP is not proposing we walk back on those design choices).

Reviewer: I think the ask here was not to reuse device plugin. It was to see if we can reject the pod during pod admission. This could help with automatically rescheduling pods if we encounter races with the limit being updated at the same time a pod gets scheduled.

Reviewer 4: When this happens, does the scheduler in control-plane knows not to place the same pod on same node again?

Author: > _see if we can reject the pod during kubelet's pod admission._

By my understanding, it can't be done. There is no meaningful synchronous check we can perform at pod admission time here, the volume attachment operation is async. 

We could evaluate pod eviction/rescheduling strategies for beta (or maybe ideally even in a separate KEP). For reference, similar problems related to scheduling have been tackled previously, see [descheduler](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/descheduler).

> _When this happens, does the scheduler in control-plane knows not to place the same pod on same node again?_

AFAIK - no. Pods are scheduled only [once](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/pod-lifecycle/#pod-lifetime) in their lifetime. Rejecting a pod during admission won't trigger rescheduling since the pod is already bound to the node.

Reviewer: Sounds good for investigating if we can improve it before beta. My understanding is most of our workload controllers can react to a rejected pod by creating a new one, but I'm not 100% sure on that. So that's how it could automatically recover. This is trying to address the race condition of the scheduler not getting the update in time, so eventually it should get the update.

Author: That makes sense @msau42 -- I will check with sig-node folks to see if it would be best to mark that enhancement as a beta requirement for this KEP, and then help push on that front. For now, I will resolve this thread and keep https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4875#discussion_r1795940887 open to continue discussing this point as the KEP involves.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

The following risks are identified:

- Frequent updates/retrieval of the `CSINode` object could increase API server load.

- Frequent calls to a CSI driver's `NodeGetInfo` RPC endpoint may become expensive, particularly if the operation involves retrieving information from a remote server or performing resource-intensive tasks. Specifically, this is a concern at scale, where the cumulative cost of multiple nodes repeatedly querying for updates is more impactful.

- There's a race condition where the scheduler might assign a stateful pod to a node with insufficient capacity if the `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` value hasn't been updated in time.

The risks are mitigated as follows:

> - The use of the Kubernetes informer pattern in the scheduler. The

Reviewer 2: Maybe clarify that this logic is already present.

Reviewer 3: does logic exists or informers for CSINode already being used?

Reviewer 2: yeah, we do use those informers https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/fc318e3ba4cb1db822d7f802993059846f64179d/pkg/scheduler/eventhandlers.go#L479

Reviewer 3: great. definitely worth mentioning in the KEP than

Author: Done! added this clarification in latest rev.

    // A volume that is both attached and mounted on a node is considered to be used o
    // The same rule applies for a unique volume that is shared among multiple pods on
    // If this field is not specified, then the supported number of volumes on this no
    // +optional
    Count *int32
}
```

#### CSIDriver

A new field, `NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds`, will be added to the `CSIDriverSpec` struct. This field allows a CSI driver to specify the interval at which the Kubelet should periodically query a driver's `NodeGetInfo` RPC endpoint to update the `CSINode` object. If this field is not set, updates will only occur in response to volume attachment failures as a result of no capacity.

```golang
// CSIDriverSpec is the specification of a CSIDriver.
type CSIDriverSpec struct {
    ...
    // NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds specifies the interval between periodic updates of
    // the CSINode allocatable capacity for this driver. If not set, periodic updates
    // are disabled, and updates occur only upon detecting capacity-related failures.
    // The minimum allowed value for this field is 10 seconds.
    // +optional

>     NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds *metav1.Duration

Reviewer 3: Would it be better to use a stream for CSIDriver to report back changes? Same way as we do Device Health in Device Plugin?

Reviewer 4: None of the CSI RPCs support streaming IIRC.

    
    if utilfeature.DefaultFeatureGate.Enabled(features.MutableCSINodeAllocatableCount) {
        for _, oldDriver := range old.Spec.Drivers {
           for _, newDriver := range new.Spec.Drivers {
                // Allow Allocatable.Count to be modified
                // Ensure all other fields are unchanged
            }
        }
    } else {
        // Existing validation logic for when feature gate is disabled
    }
    return allErrs
}
```

This updated logic allows the `Allocatable.Count` field to be modified when the feature gate is enabled, while ensuring all other fields remain immutable. When the feature gate is disabled, it falls back to the existing validation logic for backward compatibility.

#### Volume Plugin Manager

A new goroutine will be started in VolumePluginMgr’s [Run()](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/volume/plugins.go#L953) func if the `NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds` is set to a nonzero value. This goroutine will periodically trigger updates to the `CSINode` object based on the specified interval:

```golang
func (pm *VolumePluginMgr) Run(stopCh <-chan struct{}) {
    if pm.csiNodeUpdateInterval > 0 {

>         go wait.Until(pm.updateCSINodeInfo, pm.csiNodeUpdateInterval, stopCh)

Reviewer 3: if driver failed on this call, what is the behavior? How long the CSINode object will be kept with the past allocatable value? Or the failure to update means allocatable should be set to `0`?

Reviewer 4: It should remain to the last reported value and retried IMO. This is no worse than current behaviour.

| Disabled                             | Set                                 | `NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds` is ignored; `Allocatable.Count` remains static and immutable                                              |
| Disabled                             | Not set                             | No updates occur; `Allocatable.Count` remains static and immutable                                                                    |

#### Pod Construction Changes

To address race conditions where the scheduler assigns stateful pods to nodes with insufficient capacity, Kubelet's pod construction process during [WaitForAttachAndMount](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/volumemanager/volume_manager.go#L393) will now handle `ResourceExhausted` errors returned by CSI drivers during the `ControllerPublishVolume` RPC.

The `ResourceExhausted` error is directly reported on the `VolumeAttachment` object associated with the relevant attachment.

```golang
if err := kl.volumeManager.WaitForAttachAndMount(pod); err != nil {

>     if isResourceExhaustedError(err) {

Author: I think the cleanest way would be to add a `Status` field to the `VolumeError` struct: https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/master/storage/v1/types.go#L219

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

- Test the impact on pod scheduling when `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` is updated, ensuring that pods are not scheduled to nodes with insufficient capacity.
- Test the end-to-end workflow of updating `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` using a CSI driver.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag.
- Initial unit tests/integration tests completed and enabled.

#### Beta

- Allowing time for feedback (at least 2 releases between beta and GA).
- All unit tests/integration/e2e tests completed and enabled.
  - Validate kubelet behavior when API server rejects `CSINode` updates (older API server version).
  - Validate CSI driver behavior with and without the `NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds` field set.

>   - Validate scheduler behavior remains consistent regardless of whether `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` is being dynamically updated or not.

Reviewer 5: Can we extend this validation to cover Cluster Autoscaler behavior as well?

Author: Absolutely, updated Beta requirements in latest rev.

- There's a race condition where the scheduler might assign a stateful pod to a node with insufficient capacity if the `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` value hasn't been updated in time.

The risks are mitigated as follows:

- The use of the Kubernetes informer pattern in the scheduler. The scheduler uses a `CSINode` informer and lister to efficiently access and watch `CSINode` objects (this logic is already present).

- Allow users to opt in to this feature at a per-CSI driver granularity by configuring the `CSIDriver` object. Specifically, administrators will be able to fine-tune the interval update value via the `NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds` attribute in the `CSIDriver` object as per their specific requirement.

- A reactive update mechanism is implemented to immediately update the `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` value if a pod fails to enter a running state due volume attachment failures as a result of insufficient capacity. This ensures that even if a race occurs, Kubernetes quickly corrects itself and prevents further scheduling errors.

> ## Design Details

Reviewer: One more thing to check in the scheduler code. The scheduler will queue a pod for retry based on informer events. It may currently assume that CSINode is immutable. So that logic may need to be updated.

Author: I see, if we want the scheduler to re-queue pods reactively whenever `Allocatable.Count` changes, we need to also include:

```
{Event: framework.ClusterEvent{Resource: framework.CSINode, ActionType: framework.Update}}
```

in [EventsToRegister()](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/8294abc599696e0d1b5aa734afa7ae1e4f5059a0/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/nodevolumelimits/csi.go#L85). 

Thank you for pointing this out! I'll include this detail in the KEP.

    // A volume that is both attached and mounted on a node is considered to be used o
    // The same rule applies for a unique volume that is shared among multiple pods on
    // If this field is not specified, then the supported number of volumes on this no
    // +optional
    Count *int32
}
```

#### CSIDriver

A new field, `NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds`, will be added to the `CSIDriverSpec` struct. This field allows a CSI driver to specify the interval at which the Kubelet should periodically query a driver's `NodeGetInfo` RPC endpoint to update the `CSINode` object. If this field is not set, updates will only occur in response to volume attachment failures as a result of no capacity.

```golang
// CSIDriverSpec is the specification of a CSIDriver.
type CSIDriverSpec struct {
    ...
    // NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds specifies the interval between periodic updates of
    // the CSINode allocatable capacity for this driver. If not set, periodic updates
    // are disabled, and updates occur only upon detecting capacity-related failures.
    // The minimum allowed value for this field is 10 seconds.
    // +optional

>     NodeAllocatableUpdatePeriodSeconds *metav1.Duration

Reviewer 4: nit: if we intend to keep name `XXXPediodSeconds` we should use `*int64` as type and not duration type here.

Author: Updated type ✅

#### Pod Construction Changes

To address race conditions where the scheduler assigns stateful pods to nodes with insufficient capacity, Kubelet's pod construction process during [WaitForAttachAndMount](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/volumemanager/volume_manager.go#L393) will now handle `ResourceExhausted` errors returned by CSI drivers during the `ControllerPublishVolume` RPC.

The `ResourceExhausted` error is directly reported on the `VolumeAttachment` object associated with the relevant attachment. To facilitate easier detection of `ResourceExhausted` errors from `VolumeAttachment` statuses, we propose adding a `StatusCode` field to the [VolumeError](https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/master/storage/v1/types.go#L219) struct.

```golang
if err := kl.volumeManager.WaitForAttachAndMount(pod); err != nil {
    if isResourceExhaustedError(err) {
        // Update CSINode using a backoff mechanism
        // Generate event for affected pod
    } else {
        // Existing error handling
    }
}
```

This change ensures that when a pod fails to be constructed due to insufficient volume attachment capacity, that both:

> 1. The `CSINode` object is promptly updated to reflect the actual available capacity, improving future scheduling decisions.

Reviewer: Could this race with the CSI node info manager?

- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP proposes changes to make the `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` field mutable and
introduces a mechanism to update it dynamically based on user configuration at the CSI driver level. These updates can be triggered
either by periodic intervals or by failure detection (such as volume attachment failures due to insufficient capacity). This
improvement enhances the reliability of stateful pod scheduling by addressing mismatches between reported and actual
attachment capacity on nodes.

## Motivation

Currently, a mismatch between the reported and actual attachment capacity on nodes can result in permanent scheduling errors

> and stuck workloads. This occurs when volume slots are taken after a CSI driver starts up, which results in kube-scheduler assigning stateful pods to nodes lacking the necessary capacity to support them.

Reviewer 6: Could you list the scenarios in which volume slots are taken after a CSI Driver starts? Are these operations out of band with respect to CSI Drivers and k8s? You listed one already below which are the network interfaces taking the slots.

Author: Absolutely! that would greatly improve the motivation section. Incorporated this feedback in the latest rev.

- Automatically update `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` upon detecting a failure in volume attachment due to insufficient capacity.

### Non-Goals

- Modifying the core scheduling logic of Kubernetes.
- Implementing cloud provider-specific solutions within Kubernetes core.
- Re-scheduling pods stuck in a `ContainerCreating` state.

## Proposal

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a cluster administrator, I want the reported attachment capacity on nodes to accurately reflect the actual capacity, so that
stateful pods are reliably scheduled and do not become stuck in a `ContainerCreating` state due to insufficient capacity.

#### Story 2

As a cluster operator, I use volumes during node setup for components like kubelet, containerd, and additional drivers. These
boot volumes, which are not managed by CSI, may be detached after setup, and I need a way to reclaim these slots for other
uses. The current static capacity reporting doesn't allow for this flexibility.

#### Story 3

As a cluster operator, I need the Kubernetes scheduler to accurately count the number of available device slots for both storage volumes and network interfaces.

> On certain EC2 instance types, network interfaces and volumes share device slots, and network interfaces may be dynamically

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
On certain machine types, network interfaces and volumes share device slots, and network interfaces may be dynamically
```

Author: Committed suggested change.

pods to be scheduled on nodes with insufficient capacity, ultimately getting stuck in a `ContainerCreating` state.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

The following risks are identified:

- Frequent updates/retrieval of the `CSINode` object
could increase API server load.

- Frequent calls to a CSI driver's `NodeGetInfo` RPC
endpoint may become expensive, particularly if the
operation involves retrieving information from a
remote server or performing resource-intensive tasks.
Specifically, this is a concern at scale, where the
cumulative cost of multiple nodes repeatedly
querying for updates is more impactful.

The risks are mitigated as follows:

- The use of the Kubernetes informer pattern in the scheduler. The
scheduler uses a `CSINode` informer and lister to
efficiently access and watch `CSINode` objects.

- Allow users to opt in to this

> feature at a per-CSI driver granularity. Administrators will

Reviewer 6: Please mention that the capability would be stored in the `CSIDriver` object specifically.

Author: Done in latest rev 👍

also be able to fine-tune the interval update value as
per their specific requirement.

## Design Details

### Feature Gate

> A new feature gate - `MutableCSINode` - will be introduced to control the functionality implemented by this KEP. When the

Reviewer 6: There are multiple properties in the `CSINode` object that can be modified and `MutableCSINode` makes me think that the entire object could be modified however only the `allocatable` field would be changed so that it's mutable right?

It could also be `MutableCSINodeAllocatableCount`.

Author: Great point, `MutableCSINodeAllocatableCount` is indeed a much more appropriate name here, fixed.

type VolumeNodeResources struct {
    // Maximum number of unique volumes managed by the CSI driver that can be used on
    // A volume that is both attached and mounted on a node is considered to be used o
    // The same rule applies for a unique volume that is shared among multiple pods on
    // If this field is not specified, then the supported number of volumes on this no
    // +optional
    Count *int32
}
```

#### CSIDriver

A new field, `AllocatableUpdateInterval`, will be added to the `CSIDriverSpec` struct. This field allows a CSI driver to
specify the interval at which the Kubelet should periodically query a driver's `NodeGetInfo` RPC endpoint to update the
`CSINode` object. If this field is not set, updates will only occur in response to volume attachment failures as a result of no
capacity.

```golang
// CSIDriverSpec is the specification of a CSIDriver.
type CSIDriverSpec struct {
    ...
    // AllocatableUpdateInterval specifies the interval between periodic updates of
    // the CSINode allocatable capacity for this driver. If not set, periodic updates
    // are disabled, and updates occur only upon detecting capacity-related failures.
    // +optional

>     AllocatableUpdateInterval *metav1.Duration

Reviewer 6: Would it be a fixed interval period only? I think it'd be useful to do this with exp backoff too.

Author: Yes, a fixed interval period only. I'm not sure that it would make sense to update this value using an exponential backoff strategy, but open to the idea.

}
```

#### Validation Changes

> The `ValidateCSINodeUpdate` function in the API validation code path will be modified to allow updates to the `Allocatable.Count`

Reviewer 6: Permalinks to the functions would help the reader :)

Author: Great suggestion, added links : )

field when the feature gate is enabled:

```golang
func ValidateCSINodeUpdate(new, old *storage.CSINode) field.ErrorList {
    allErrs := ValidateCSINode(new)
    
    if utilfeature.DefaultFeatureGate.Enabled(features.MutableCSINode) {
        for _, oldDriver := range old.Spec.Drivers {
           for _, newDriver := range new.Spec.Drivers {
                // Allow Allocatable.Count to be modified
                // Ensure all other fields are unchanged
            }
        }
    } else {
        // Existing validation logic for when feature gate is disabled
    }
    return allErrs
}
```

This updated logic allows the `Allocatable.Count` field to be modified when the feature gate is enabled, while ensuring all
other fields remain immutable. When the feature gate is disabled, it falls back to the existing validation logic for backward
compatibility.

> 

Reviewer 6: Another validation is the entities that can update the field, only the kubelet should update it and not end users, so that might mean a change in the kube-apiserver as well.

Author: Hmm, I've been thinking more about this... if I understand the ask correctly, it is to ensure that **only** kubelet can update `CSINode` objects, and prevent any other entity - including privileged users - from updating this object.

It seems that the node authorizer is designed to authorize API requests _made by kubelets_, not restrict requests from other sources. In other words, no change on the node authorizer could possibly address @mauriciopoppe's request (and, no changes are needed on the node authorizer side because it already allows updating the `CSINode` object, as per @aojea's finding above : )

I'm curious to know if there is precedent before we continue down this path. I believe we don't only allow kubelet to create `CSINode` objects, wouldn't it make sense to have also enforced this restriction for object creation as well? It seems odd to allow privileged entities the ability to create but not update.

Reviewer: I am not aware of any APIs where we restrict the users. The only distinction is cluster-level API vs namespace-scoped APIs.

#### Volume Plugin Manager

A new goroutine will be started in VolumePluginMgr’s `Run()` func if the `AllocatableUpdateInterval` is set to a nonzero value. This goroutine will periodically trigger updates to the `CSINode` object based on the specified interval:

```golang
func (pm *VolumePluginMgr) Run(stopCh <-chan struct{}) {
    if pm.csiNodeUpdateInterval > 0 {
        go wait.Until(pm.updateCSINodeInfo, pm.csiNodeUpdateInterval, stopCh)
    }
}
```

#### NodeInfoManager Interface Extension

The existing `NodeInfoManager` interface will be extended to include a new method for updating the `CSINode` object:

```golang
// Interface implements an interface for managing labels of a node
type Interface interface {
    CreateCSINode() (*storagev1.CSINode, error)
    ...
    // UpdateCSINode updates the CSINode object
    UpdateCSINode() error
}
```

#### CSINode Update Mechanism

> 

Reviewer 6: If the feature flag is not set and `AllocatableUpdateInterval` is set then what's the behavior?

Author: When the feature gate is disabled, `AllocatableUpdateInterval` is ignored and `Allocatable.Count` remains static + immutable. Included a table in latest revision for clarity.

- If `AllocatableUpdateInterval` is set in the `CSIDriver` object, Kubernetes will periodically call the CSI driver’s
`NodeGetInfo` RPC endpoint at the defined interval, and update the `CSINode` object with the latest `Allocatable.Count`.

> - If `AllocatableUpdateInterval` is not set, updates will only occur in response to a failure during volume attachment. For

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- If `AllocatableUpdateInterval` is not set, updates will only occur in response to a failure during volume attachment if the feature flag is set. For
```

- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

- Upgrade Strategy
  - Upgrade the API server first to support mutable `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` and the new `AllocatableUpdateInterval` field in `CSIDriver` object.
  - Upgrade nodes
  - Update CSI drivers to take advantage of the new feature, if desired.

- Downgrade Strategy
  - If downgrading the API server, ensure that nodes are downgraded first to avoid rejected `CSINode` update attempts.
  - CSI drivers using the `AllocatableUpdateInterval` feature should be reconfigured to not use this field before downgrading the API server.

### Version Skew Strategy

This enhancement primarily involves changes to the kubelet and the API server, with no impact on the scheduler. Here's how the system will behave in various version skew scenarios:

- API Server considerations
  - Older API server versions will reject updates to the `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` field and won't recognize the `AllocatableUpdateInterval` field in the `CSIDriver` object.

- Kubelet version considerations

>   - Newer kubelet (with this feature) + Older API server: The kubelet will attempt to update the `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` field due to capacity failures, but these updates will be rejected by the API server.

Reviewer 7: with the `AllocatableUpdateInterval` field not present (unknown fields are pruned on read), how often does the kubelet update the count?

Author: If `AllocatableUpdateInterval` is not explicitly defined, then Kubelet will only update the `CSINode.Spec.Drivers[*].Allocatable.Count` field when a pod fails to enter the running state because a volume in the pod spec failed to attach due to no capacity on the node. This KEP deems this an invalid state (scheduler should _never_ assign a stateful pod to a node that does not have capacity to support the attachment). 

As for how often this invalid state is reached, it depends on external factors such as a cluster operator manually attaching volumes outside of Kubernetes, or CNI plugins dynamically attaching network interfaces as the user scales up their workload (done if number of available `IPv4` addresses are insufficient for pod networking) -- these are operations that typically happen infrequently.

We also discussed the idea of building a protection mechanism to prevent more than X number of updates within X number of minutes, which I think is a good suggestion!

-->

### Scalability

<!--
For alpha, this section is encouraged: reviewers should consider these questions
and attempt to answer them.

For beta, this section is required: reviewers must answer these questions.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.
-->

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API call type (e.g. PATCH pods)
  - estimated throughput
  - originating component(s) (e.g. Kubelet, Feature-X-controller)
Focusing mostly on:
  - components listing and/or watching resources they didn't before
  - API calls that may be triggered by changes of some Kubernetes resources
    (e.g. update of object X triggers new updates of object Y)
  - periodic API calls to reconcile state (e.g. periodic fetching state,
    heartbeats, leader election, etc.)
-->

Yes, there will be new API calls to update the `CSINode` object:

```
API call type: PATCH
Estimated throughput: Depends on the `AllocatableUpdateInterval` setting and the frequency of volume attachment failures.
Originating component: Kubelet, KCM

> ```

Reviewer 7: What are defaults and recommended values and some back of the envelope based on number of nodes?  Is there a lower limit?

Author: Default behavior: the periodic sync will not occur unless a cluster admin explicitly configures the `AllocatableUpdateInterval`  field in the `CSIDriver` object.

Lower limit: Spoke with David offline and landed on `10s` as an acceptable latency for periodic updates to this value. This translates to a standing load of `100qps` on a 1000 node cluster, which is reasonable and addresses scalability concerns.

Reviewer 7: Thanks.  Reminder that this is the fastest possible rate.  Keeping it at 10s, prevents completely crushing a cluster, but larger clusters likely want bigger values (60s?).  The lower limit is just to prevent destroying a server by a careless admin.
